>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY JUNE 13:
IN THE FIRST MAJOR SPEECH OF HER
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN, HILLARY
CLINTON LAYS OUT HER ECONOMIC
MESSAGE.
THE ONGOING FIGHT IN
AFGHANISTAN.
FIND OUT WHO WESTERN OFFICIALS
BELIEVE IS SENDING CASH AND
WEAPONS TO THE TALIBAN.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, AN
AMBITIOUS PLAN TO FIND HOMES FOR
ALL OF THE HOMELESS VETERANS IN
LOS ANGELES.
>> WE'VE JUST COME TO ACCEPT
THAT WE MANAGE HOMELESSNESS.
THAT WE TRY TO MAKE IS LESS BAD
BUT WE NEVER MAKE IT BETTER.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
A DAY AFTER BEING REBUKED BY
MEMBERS OF HIS OWN PARTY IN
CONGRESS, PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY
USED HIS WEEKLY RADIO ADDRESS TO
URGE THEM TO RECONSIDER AND
SUPPORT AN INTERNATIONAL TRADE
DEAL.
>> THIS IS ABOUT THE KIND OF
COUNTRY WE WANT TO BUILD FOR OUR
KIDS AND OUR GRANDKIDS.
AND IF I DID NOT THINK THAT
SMART NEW TRADE DEALS WERE THE
RIGHT THING TO DO FOR THE
WORKING FAMILIES, I WOULDN'T BE
FIGHTING FOR IT.
THIS IS THE RIGHT THING TO DO.
>> Sreenivasan: HOUSE DEMOCRATIC
LEADER NANCY PELOSI WAS AMONG
THOSE WHO BROKE WITH THE
PRESIDENT DURING A VOTE
YESTERDAY.
SHE AND OTHER DEMOCRATS FEAR THE
DEAL COULD COST AMERICANS JOBS.
THE HOUSE COULD VOTE AGAIN EARLY
NEXT WEEK.
AFTER TWO MONTHS OF QUIET
CAMPAIGNING, IN NEW YORK TODAY,
THE DEMOCRATIC FRONTRUNNER,
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, HELD HER
FIRST OFFICIAL CAMPAIGN RALLY IN
HER BID FOR THE PRESIDENCY.
HER FOCUS: ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY.
>> WHILE MANY OF YOU ARE WORKING
MULTIPLE JOBS TO MAKE ENDS MEET,
YOU SEE THE TOP 25 HEDGE FUND
MANAGERS MAKING MORE THAN ALL OF
AMERICA'S KINDERGARTEN TEACHERS
COMBINED AND OFTEN PAYING A
LOWER TAX RATE.
SO YOU HAVE TO WONDER WHEN DOES
MY HARD WORK PAY OFF?
WHEN DOES MY FAMILY GET AHEAD?
WELL I SAY NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE IN-
DEPTH ANALYSIS OF CLINTON'S
FIRST MAJOR SPEECH OF THE
CAMPAIGN RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
IN DALLAS TODAY, A POLICE SNIPER
KILLED A MAN WHO LAUNCHED AN
ATTACK OVERNIGHT ON POLICE
HEADQUARTERS.
THE LONE SUSPECT, TENTATIVELY
IDENTIFIED AS 35-YEAR-OLD JAMES
BOULWARE, PULLED UP TO THE
POLICE STATION IN AN ARMORED
VEHICLE, PLACED SEVERAL BAGS OF
EXPLOSIVES AROUND THE BUILDING,
AND STARTED SHOOTING.
NO ONE WAS HURT.
THE SUSPECT THEN LED DOZENS OF
SQUAD CARS ON A CHASE THAT ENDED
WITH A STANDOFF IN A RESTAURANT
PARKING LOT.
POLICE LATER DEPLOYED A ROBOT TO
INSPECT THE MAN'S VAN.
THEY SAID THEY FOUND AT LEAST
TWO EXPLOSIVES INSIDE.
HE HAD ACCUSED POLICE OF TAKING
HIS CHILD AND OF CALLING HIM "A
TERRORIST."
>> WE BARELY SURVIVED THE INTENT
OF THIS SUSPECT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THE UNITED
STATES HAS RELEASED SIX MEN WHO
SPENT MORE THAN A DECADE
IMPRISONED AT GUANTANAMO BAY IN
CUBA.
THE SIX ARRIVED IN OMAN THIS
MORNING.
ALL SIX WERE SUSPECTED MEMBERS
OF AL-QAEDA, BUT WERE NEVER
CHARGED.
126 PRISONERS HAVE BEEN RELEASED
FROM GUANTANAMO SINCE PRESIDENT
OBAMA TOOK OFFICE IN 2009.
116 PRISONERS ARE STILL BEHIND
BARS.
A LEGAL VICTORY FOR CONSUMERS.
A FEDERAL APPEALS COURT IN
DENVER YESTERDAY UPHELD A LAW
ALLOWING A UTAH COMPANY TO SELL
CONTACT LENSES AT DEEPLY
DISCOUNTED PRICES.
IN RULING, THE COURT REJECTED A
LAWSUIT BROUGHT BY JOHNSON AND
JOHNSON, BAUSCH AND LOMB AND
OTHER CONTACT LENS
MANUFACTURERS.
THE COMPANIES WANTED THE COURT
TO IMPOSE MINIMUM PRICES ON
THEIR PRODUCTS.
IT'S ESTIMATED THAT 38 MILLION
AMERICANS WEAR CONTACT LENSES.
IT IS A FOUR BILLION DOLLAR
MARKET ANNUALLY.
SMART-PHONE THEFTS ARE
APPARENTLY DECLINING.
CONSUMER REPORTS SAYS JUST MORE
THAN 2 MILLION PHONES WERE
STOLEN LAST YEAR, COMPARED TO
MORE THAN THREE MILLION THE YEAR
BEFORE.
THE MAGAZINE SAYS THIEVES MIGHT
BE LESS LIKELY TO SNATCH THE
PHONES BECAUSE MANY ARE NOW
EQUIPPED WITH WHAT ARE KNOWN AS
KILL SWITCHES, REMOVING
SENSITIVE INFORMATION AND
DISABLING THE PHONES AFTER THEY
ARE STOLEN.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS IT WAS THE
HOTTEST MAY ON RECORD IN
ALASKA.
THE AVERAGE TEMPERATURE THERE
WAS JUST BELOW 45 DEGREES.
THAT IS MORE THAN SEVEN DEGREES
ABOVE AVERAGE, ACCORDING TO THE
NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION.
IT WAS ALSO ONE OF THE DRIEST
MAYS ON RECORD THERE AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, MORE ABOUT
HILLARY CLINTON'S MAJOR ADDRESS
TODAY, AND THE STATE OF THE 2016
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
JOINING ME TO HELP ANALYZE
CLINTON'S APPEARANCE TODAY IS
LISA DEJARDINS, THE NEWSHOUR'S
POLITICAL DIRECTOR.
>> CANDIDATES MAKE A LOT OF
SPEECHES.
WHY DID THIS ONE -- WHY WAS THIS
ONE SO IMPORTANT FOR THE CLINTON
FOLKS TO HAVE THIS KIND OF
VISIBILITY?
>> THIS WAS HILLARY CLINTON
ANSWERING THE WHY ISSUE RUNNING
QUESTION.
UP TO NOW SHE TRIED TO PROVE TO
PEOPLE I'M ACCESSIBLE, WARM,
RELATABLE, AND HAS TON SMALL
EVENTS ALL OVER THE COUNTRY WITH
A FEW PEOPLE.
NOW SHE THAT IS TO PROVE THERE'S
A REASON FOR HER TO RUN.
THIS IS WHAT SHE'S TRYING TO DO
TODAY.
AND IT WAS A BROAD PHILOSOPHICAL
SPEECH BUT SHE ALSO HAD A LOT OF
SPECIFICS.
REALLY HER CAMPAIGN THREW
EVERYTHING THEY HAD, I THINK,
INTO THIS SPEECH.
>> SHE ALSO TALKED A BY THE
ABOUT HER MOM, MORE THAN WE
REMEMBER ABOUT DURING THE LAST
CAMPAIGN.
>> IT IS INTERESTING.
I THINK SHE'S TRYING TO BRING IN
A HUMAN FACTOR AND TRYING TO SAY
I'M NOT THE ONLY ONE THAT YOU
CAN LOOK TO AS A MODEL.
I LOOK TO MY OWN MOTHER.
AND SHE USED HER MOTHER'S STORY.
HER MOTHER WAS FORCED OUT OF HER
HOUSE.
SHE DIDN'T GO INTO DETAILS
THERE, WHEN SHE WAS YOUNG, 14
YEARS OLD, MADE HER WAY AS A
MAID, EDUCATED AND AS SECRETARY
CLINTON SAID TODAY IN HER
SPEECH, HER MOM RAISED HER TO
SAY SOMEONE SHOULD BELIEVE IN
YOU.
YOU GET YOUR OWN CHANCES BUT IT
HELPS WHEN YOU HAVE SOMEONE THAT
BELIEVES IN YOU AND WHEN HILLARY
CLINTON WAS USING THAT AS A
DEVICE TODAY WAS TO SAY I
BELIEVE IN AMERICA AND I BELIEVE
ESPECIALLY IN WORKERS, LOW-PAID
WORKERS AND I BELIEVE IN WOMEN'S
RIGHTS AND USING IT AS METAPHOR
FOR WHAT SHE THINKS A LEADERSHIP
ROLE SHOULD BE.
>> Sreenivasan: A COUPLE OF NEW
POLES WERE OUT AND REPUBLICANS
WERE SAYING FEWER THAN HALF OF
THE AMERICANS BELIEVE HILLARY
CLINTON TO BE TRUSTWORTHY OR
HONEST.
HOW DOES THAT PLAY INTO THE NEW
CHAPTER HER PRESENTATION.
>> IT WAS INTERESTING.
I DIDN'T HEAR HER DIRECTLY HEAD
ON ADDRESS THE TRUST ISSUE.
NED INSTEAD THEY TRIED TO PLAY
TO HER STRONG POINTS WHICH WAS
HER DECISIVENESS, AND THREE
TIMES SHE CAME TO HER BIO AND
WHAT SHE HAS DONE TO PROVE THIS
IS HER TIME.
AND INTERESTINGLY ENOUGH, SHE
DID NOT TRY TO SEPARATE HERSELF
FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA, HE HIMSELF
NOT DOING SO WELL IN THE POLLS
OVER THE LAST YEAR BUT TWO
DIFFERENT TIMES SHE TIED HERSELF
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA.
MY ISSUE IS THAT SHE'S GOING FOR
THE OBAMA VOTERS, FOR THE CORE
DEMOCRATIC VOTER WHO LOVED HER
HUSBAND, LIKES HER, AND ALSO THE
PRESIDENT.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF CORE
DEMOCRATIC VOTERS WHO ARE IN
SORT OF BERNIE SANDERS ELIZABETH
WARREN WING OF THE PARTY.
HOW MUCH IS THAT INFLUENCING
WHAT SHE IS SAYING?
>> YOU COULD HEAR IT TODAY FOR
SURE.
BUT HER MAIN THEME, IF YOU HAD
TO PICK JUST ONE, WAS THE IDEA
OF INEQUALITY, ESPECIALLY
INEQUALITY IN WAGES AND TO SOME
DEGREE INEQUALITY IN WOMEN'S
RIGHTS BUT MOSTLY ABOUT WAGES.
SHE MENTIONED MANY SPECIFIC
TIMES OF WORKERS.
TALKED ABOUT NURSES WORKING
OVERNIGHT.
TALK ABOUT LOW-PAID TEACHERS.
TALKED ABOUT WAITRESSES.
SHE IS HITTING THESE SORTS OF
GROUPS OF PEOPLE THAT FEEL
THEY'RE NOT GETTING MAYBE A FAIR
SHARE.
AND ALSO WENT AFTER REPUBLICANS
FOR, IN HER WORDS, HELPING THE
FAT CATS IN WALL STREET AND ALSO
SPECIFICALLY MENTIONED THE
SUPREME COURT.
THERE WAS A GOOD MENTION THAT IS
A SHE WANTS TO OVERTURN CITIZENS
UNITED AND SAID THAT'S A WAY THE
RICH ARE GETTING RICHER.
>> THAT'S JUST THE STRUGGLE IN
HER OWN PARTY AND THERE'S THE
OTHER PARTY, THE REPUBLICANS AND
I THINK JEB BUSH IS SET TO
ANNOUNCE ON MONDAY.
SO THIS IS AN INCREDIBLY CROWDED
FIELD ALREADY.
SO SHE IS REALLY GOING UP
AGAINST AN ENTIRE GANG OF
OPPONENTS.
>> I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
I THINK WHAT SHE'S TRYING TO DO
TODAY IS COVER A LOT OF BASES.
SHE DIDN'T JUST TALK ABOUT
INEQUALITY.
THAT KIND OF STUCK OUT TO ME.
BUT SHE HIT ON CLIMATE CHANGE
AND A HUGE NUMBER OF ISSUES
TODAY.
I THINK THE DANGER HILLARY
CLINTON HAS SUPER-THE SPEECH,
INASMUCH AS THERE'S A BROAD
PHILOSOPHY IS THAT SHE TRIED TO
DO SO MANY THINGS THAT WALKING
AWAY I ASKED PEOPLE WHAT WAS THE
MAIN MESSAGE THAT YOU HEARD
TODAY AND NONE OF THE VOTERS
COULD PICK ONE THING.
>> WHERE DOES THE REPUBLICAN
FIELD STAND NOW?
>> I THINK JEB BUSH HAS HAD A
ROUGH COUPLE OF WEEKS WITH THE
SHAKE UP IN HIS CAMPAIGN STAFF.
BUT TO BE HONEST, I THINK ALL OF
THIS IS IN THE ATMOSPHERE AND WE
DON'T KNOW RIGHT NOW WHERE THE
REPUBLICAN VOTERS ARE.
I THINK SCOTT WALKER IS STILL
RISING VERY STRONG.
MARCO RUBIO VERY STRONG AMONG
THE REPUBLICAN VOTERS AND
THERE'S SO MUCH TO BE SHAKEN OUT
AND IT'S VERY IMPORTANT FOR JEB
BUSH TO BE STRONG ON MONDAY.
FRANKLY HIS APPEARANCES AND
SPEECHES AS HE HAS HAD THIS ROLL
OUT VICE PRESIDENT BEEN HIS
STRONG AND THE FACT HIS CAMPAIGN
IS LOOKING TO HAVE A BIG MOMENT
ON MONDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: LISA DESJARDINS
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE TO BE HERE IN
NEW YORK WITH YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
OUR FOCUS TONIGHT: THE
PERSISTENT PROBLEM OF
HOMELESSNESS AMONG AMERICA'S
VETERANS.
THE GOVERNMENT ESTIMATES THAT
NEARLY 50,000 VETS ARE HOMELESS
TODAY.
THAT'S ACTUALLY A MAJOR
IMPROVEMENT FROM A DECADE AGO.
BUT GETTING RID OF THE PROBLEM
ALTOGETHER HAS PROVEN DIFFICULT,
IN PART BECAUSE VETERANS SUFFER
MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS AT A
HIGHER RATE THAN THOSE WHO HAVE
NOT SERVED.
THE PROBLEM IS ESPECIALLY ACUTE
IN LOS ANGELES WHICH HAS MORE
HOMELESS VETERANS THAN ANYWHERE
ELSE IN THE NATION.
TONIGHT, NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JOHN CARLOS FRAY
REPORTS ON THAT CITY'S AMBITIOUS
PLAN TO END HOMELESSNESS AMONG
VETERANS THIS YEAR.
THAT'S THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S GOAL NATIONALLY
AS WELL.
>> Reporter: 56-YEAR-OLD LENDELL
SEAY PROUDLY SHOWS OFF HIS TIDY
ONE BEDROOM APARTMENT, WHICH
OVERLOOKS THE FIVE FREEWAY IN
EAST LOS ANGELES.
THE UNIT'S BATHROOM IS SO BIG HE
KEEPS HIS BIKE IN IT, AND
THERE'S PLENTY OF ROOM FOR HIS
COLLECTION OF HATS, MANY OF
WHICH TOUT HIS MILITARY SERVICE.
>> MY PRIMARY JOB WAS IN MOTOR
T, TRANSPORTATION.
>> Reporter: SEAY SERVED IN THE
MARINES FOR MORE THAN 21 YEARS,
INCLUDING DESERT STORM IN IRAQ,
BEFORE RETIRING IN 1998.
BUT DESPITE HIS SUCCESSFUL
MILITARY CAREER, AFTER HIS
FIANCE PASSED AWAY FROM A STROKE
IN 2004, SEAY FOUND HIMSELF IN A
DOWNWARD SPIRAL.
>> AND THAT'S WHEN THE DRINKING
AND EVERYTHING REALLY, REALLY
KICKED IN.
>> Reporter: FOR YOU?
>> YES, AND I JUST-- JUST FELL
APART AND LOST EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: SO YOU FOUND
YOURSELF WHERE?
>> I FOUND MYSELF IN THE-- IN
THE STREETS AROUND CULVER CITY
AND SANTA MONICA.
>> Reporter: FROM ONE DAY TO THE
NEXT, YOU WERE HOMELESS?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: BEFORE HE MOVED
INTO THIS APARTMENT LAST
OCTOBER, SEAY HAD BEEN HOMELESS,
OFF AND ON, FOR A DECADE.
>> EVERYTHING THAT I MADE WAS
MOSTLY SPENT DRINKING.
>> Reporter: FAMOUSLY SUNNY LOS
ANGELES HAS LONG BEEN KNOWN AS
THE HOMELESS CAPITAL OF AMERICA,
FROM BEACHY COMMUNITIES LIKE
SANTA MONICA AND VENICE TO SKID
ROW DOWNTOWN.
THERE ARE ABOUT 45,000 HOMELESS
PEOPLE IN L.A. COUNTY, ABOUT
4,000 OF WHOM ARE VETERANS.
THE NUMBER OF HOMELESS VETS IN
THE CITY OF L.A. HAS FALLEN BY
ABOUT ONE THIRD SINCE 2009.
AND LAST YEAR THE CITY JOINED AN
AMBITIOUS NATIONAL EFFORT
ALREADY UNDERWAY TO COMPLETELY
END VETERAN HOMELESSNESS BY THE
END OF THIS YEAR.
L.A.'S COMMITMENT COINCIDED WITH
AN EVENT LAST JULY ATTENDED BY
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA, WHO
HAS CHAMPIONED VETERANS
INITIATIVES FOR THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
>> AND MAKE NO MISTAKE IT IS AN
AGGRESSIVE GOAL.
BUT WE HAVE SEEN TIME AND TIME
AGAIN THAT IF YOU BREAK THESE
NUMBERS DOWN THEN THIS PROBLEM
BECOMES EMINENTLY SOLVABLE.
>> I DON'T THINK ANYBODY'S HAD
THE CONFIDENCE THAT WE'D EVER BE
ABLE TO MAKE A DENT IN
HOMELESSNESS.
WE'VE JUST COME TO ACCEPT THAT
WE MANAGE HOMELESSNESS, THAT WE
TRY TO MAKE IT LESS BAD, BUT WE
NEVER MAKE IT BETTER.
>> Reporter: LOS ANGELES MAYOR
ERIC GARCETTI IS A FORMER NAVY
RESERVIST HIMSELF.
HE SAYS THE CITY'S EFFORT TO END
HOMELESSNESS AMONG VETERANS IS
DIFFERENT THAN HOW THINGS USED
TO BE IN L.A.
>> OUR POLICY WAS VERY LAZY."
I JUST DO HOUSING," "I JUST
FEED THEM," "I'M A FREE HEALTH
CLINIC," AND IT-- AND IT
ADMIRABLY-- DEALT WITH THE
CRISIS OF PEOPLE POTENTIALLY
DYING ON OUR STREETS, BUT IT
NEVER TURNED THEIR LIVES AROUND
PERMANENTLY.
THAT'S WHAT'S CHANGED NOW.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST STEP OF
THIS NEW MODEL IS A PERMANENT
HOUSE, FUNDED MOSTLY AT
GOVERNMENT EXPENSE WITH SERVICES
THEN ADDED AROUND THE RESIDENT.
IT'S CALLED PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING.
AND THAT'S WHAT LENDELL SEAY
FOUND HIMSELF IN.
SEAY LIVES IN THIS COMPLEX THAT
HOUSES ONLY FORMERLY HOMELESS
VETERANS.
WHILE THERE IS NO FIRM PROGRAM
THAT HE HAS TO FOLLOW, HE HAS
ACCESS TO SUPPORT SERVICES,
INCLUDING ONSITE CASE MANAGERS,
MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELING,
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT, AND
EVEN A COMMUNITY GARDEN.
OFFICIALS IN L.A. POINT TO
RESEARCH SHOWING NEARLY 90
PERCENT OF CHRONICALLY HOMELESS
PEOPLE REMAINED HOUSED AFTER
FIVE YEARS USING THIS MODEL.
FOR SEAY, WHO HAS BEEN SOBER FOR
MORE THAN TWO YEARS, IT'S MORE
THAN HE HAD HOPED FOR.
>> IT FEEL GOOD.
SOMETIMES, I WALK AROUND THE
APARTMENT AND NO TV OR NOTHING
ON AND JUST SINGING FOR NO
REASON AT ALL.
AND THEN I CATCH MYSELF DOING IT
AND I START TO LAUGH AND I SAY,"
YOU MUST BE GOING CRAZY NOW."
BUT I'M JUST HAPPY, IT FEEL--
>> Reporter: A GOOD CRAZY.
>> IT FEEL GOOD.
>> Reporter: THERE IS NO TIME
LIMIT ON STAYING IN THE
APARTMENT.
RESIDENTS GENERALLY PAY 30% OF
THEIR INCOME IN RENT.
FOR SEAY, THAT'S $470 FROM HIS
PENSION.
THE REST IS SUBSIDIZED WITH A
FEDERAL VOUCHER SPECIFICALLY FOR
HOMELESS VETERANS.
SINCE 2008, NEARLY 80,000 OF
THESE VOUCHERS FOR HOMELESS VETS
HAVE BEEN AWARDED AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
>> I'LL SIGN IT, THANKS.
>> Reporter: CHRISTINE MARGIOTTA
RUNS HOME FOR GOOD FOR THE
UNITED WAY OF GREATER LOS
ANGELES, WHICH HAS COORDINATED
THE EFFORTS OF HUNDREDS OF
SERVICE PROVIDERS WORKING TO
HELP HOMELESS VETS.
SHE SAYS HOUSING FOR THE
HOMELESS, INCLUDING VETERANS, IS
LESS EXPENSIVE THAN TRYING TO
CARE FOR PEOPLE ON THE STREET,
WHICH COSTS NEARLY $1 BILLION
ANNUALLY IN L.A.
>> BECAUSE THAT PERSON IS USING
THE EMERGENCY ROOMS FOR THEIR
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE.
THEY MAY BE CYCLING IN AND OUT
OF JAIL OR PRISON.
THEY'RE REALLY SUFFERING, OUT ON
OUR STREETS.
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT PERMANENT
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING IS ACTUALLY
40% CHEAPER THAN LEAVING SOMEONE
ON THE STREETS AND, IN OUR
MINDS, DOING NOTHING.
>> Reporter: BUT DESPITE THE
PROGRESS MADE, THERE'S NO
SHORTAGE OF HOMELESS PEOPLE,
INCLUDING VETERANS, ON THE
STREETS OF LOS ANGELES.
EARLY ONE MORNING WE WENT TO
SKID ROW IN DOWNTOWN L.A. WITH
OUTREACH WORKERS FROM U.S. VETS,
A NON-PROFIT VETERAN SUPPORT
GROUP.
THERE WE MET BENJAMIN BARRAZA
JR.
CAN I ASK YOU HOW LONG YOU'VE
BEEN ON THE STREETS?
>> HOW LONG?
RIGHT NOW, IT'S-- IT'S-- SINCE
I'VE BEEN OUT OF PRISON?
TWO YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: YOU'VE BEEN ON THE
STREET FOR TWO YEARS?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: BARRAZA IS AN ARMY
VETERAN WHO SERVED FROM 1971 TO
1974.
BUT HE TOLD US THAT HE'D ALSO
SPENT TIME IN PRISON.
SINCE HE'D BEEN OUT, HE'D BEEN
STAYING IN SKID ROW SHELTERS.
HE SHOWED US THE FEW ESSENTIAL
ITEMS THAT HE KEEPS WITH HIM.
>> I GOT IT ALL HERE, MAN.
YOU KNOW, THIS IS MY LITTLE KIT,
YOU KNOW.
YOU GOT TO KEEP CLEAN, SMELL
CLEAN, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: DESPITE QUALIFYING
FOR A FEDERAL HOUSING VOUCHER,
BARRAZA HAD NOT BEEN ABLE TO
FIND A PERMANENT HOUSE.
FOR HIM AND MANY OTHERS ON THE
STREET, FINDING AN AFFORDABLE
APARTMENT OR PLACEMENT IN A
FACILITY WITH SERVICES ISN'T
EASY.
>> Reporter: IS IT FRUSTRATING?
>> OH MAN, IT'S-- IT'S-- IT'S--
GIVES ME, RIGHT NOW, I'M
GETTING A HEADACHE RIGHT NOW,
JUST THINKING ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: ALL THE THINGS YOU
HAVE TO DEAL WITH JUST TO GET A
PLACE.
>> WELL, BECAUSE I CAN'T EVEN
GET AROUND.
I MEAN, I'M OBESE.
I PUT WEIGHT ON, YOU KNOW, WHEN
I WAS IN PRISON MY MOTHER DIED
ON ME.
>> Reporter: WOW, I'M SO SORRY.
>> YOU KNOW, I CAUGHT HEPATITIS
C.
>> Reporter: EVEN WITH THE FOCUS
OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND
LOCAL OFFICIALS ON VETERAN
HOMELESSNESS, BARRAZA AND
THOUSANDS OF OTHER TOUGH CASES
ARE STILL ON L.A. STREETS.
I WAS ON THE STREET THIS
MORNING.
AND WE RAN INTO SOME VETERANS.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: FROM MY EYES, IT
LOOKS LIKE AN IMPOSSIBLE TASK.
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE IN DIRE
STRAITS.
HOW DO YOU DEAL WITH THAT
POPULATION?
>> THE MORE YOU GO INTO THE
POPULATION, THE TOUGHER IT IS TO
ACHIEVE THAT GOAL.
BECAUSE TOWARDS THE END, IT IS
THE PEOPLE WHO ARE THE MOST
SERVICE-RESISTANT WHO MOST
DEEPLY EXPERIENCE MENTAL HEALTH
CHALLENGES WHEN PEOPLE HAVE
PTSD, SUBSTANCE ABUSE ISSUES,
WHICH OFTEN INTERMINGLE WITH
EACH OTHER.
SOME WILL TAKE MORE TIME, BUT
I'M CONFIDENT WE CAN MAKE SURE
THAT EACH ONE OF THEM HAS A
PATHWAY OFF OUR STREETS.
>> Reporter: SOME CITIES,
INCLUDING PHOENIX, SALT LAKE
CITY, NEW ORLEANS, AND HOUSTON
HAVE SAID THEY'VE BEEN ABLE TO
HOUSE THEIR ENTIRE POPULATIONS
OF CHRONICALLY HOMELESS VETS
WITH PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING.
BUT FOR L.A., TIME IS SHORT IF
THE CITY HOPES TO MEET ITS YEAR-
END GOAL.
AND THAT ARBITRARY DEADLINE HAS
CONCERNED SOME ADVOCATES.
STEVE PECK IS THE C.E.O. OF U.S.
VETS, WHICH IS A PARTNER IN THE
CITY'S EFFORTS AND HOUSES MORE
THAN 1,000 VETERANS IN THE L.A.
AREA.
>> MY FEAR IS THAT, YOU KNOW,
DECEMBER 31, SOMEONE'S GOING TO
PLANT THE FLAG AND SAY, "WE'VE
DONE IT."
AND ANYONE ELSE THEN EVERYONE
DIVERTS THEIR ATTENTION TO
SOMETHING ELSE.
WE'RE GOING TO BE DOING THIS FOR
YEARS BECAUSE THERE ARE GOING TO
BE VETERANS FALLING TOWARD
HOMELESSNESS FOR YEARS AND YEARS
TO COME.
>> Reporter: PECK, A MARINE
VETERAN, ALSO WORRIES THAT
PUTTING SO MUCH FOCUS ON
PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
PROVIDED WITH ALMOST NO
PRECONDITIONS, AN APPROACH KNOWN
AS HOUSING FIRST, LEAVES MANY
VETS OUT, INCLUDING THOSE WHO
MAY SIMPLY NEED SOME HELP
GETTING BACK ON THEIR FEET.
>> I THINK THE TRAP THAT PEOPLE
GET INTO IS THAT THEY HEAR ABOUT
SOMETHING LIKE HOUSING FIRST AND
SAY, "THAT'S THE ANSWER."
THEY FOCUS ON THAT AS THE ONE
ANSWER.
AND IT'S A VERY COMPLEX PROBLEM.
ALL VETERANS ARE DIFFERENT.
THEY ALL HAVE DIFFERENT NEEDS.
WE'VE DISCOVERED THAT HERE.
>> Reporter: THERE'S ALSO
CONCERN THAT THE FOCUS ON
HOMELESS VETS WILL COME AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE BROADER PROBLEM.
IN FACT, OVERALL HOMELESSNESS IN
L.A. IS UP 12% SINCE 2013
ACCORDING TO DATA RELEASED LAST
MONTH.
AND DESPITE THE ATTENTION AND
MASSIVE EFFORT, THE CITY OF L.A.
EVEN SAW A SMALL INCREASE IN
HOMELESS VETS.
LOS ANGELES HAS HAD A REPUTATION
FOR HAVING A VERY LARGE HOMELESS
POPULATION.
FOR DECADES.
THIS IS NOTHING NEW.
SO, IT SEEMS-- I GUESS I'M BEING
A SKEPTIC HERE, THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO GET TO
FUNCTIONAL ZERO BY THE END OF
THE YEAR BUT THIS HAS NEVER
HAPPENED BEFORE.
>> IT'S NEVER HAPPENED.
BUT WHEN I WAS CAMPAIGNING FOR
MAYOR I SAID, "I DON'T WANT TO
JUST MANAGE HOMELESSNESS."
WE NEEDED TO TAKE A DISCRETE
POPULATION TO GIVE PEOPLE THE
CONFIDENCE THAT IF WE CAN END
VETERANS' HOMELESSNESS, WE CAN
ATTACK CHRONIC HOMELESSNESS,
FAMILIES AND OTHER POPULATIONS
LIKE FOSTER YOUTH, WHO EACH HAVE
DISTINCT NEEDS.
>> Reporter: FOR VETS, THE CITY
WILL NEED SYSTEMS IN PLACE.
IN THE NEXT THREE YEARS, L.A.
WILL HAVE ABOUT 10,000 NEW
VETERANS RETURNING HOME AND IF
THE TREND CONTINUES, HUNDREDS
WILL AT SOME POINT BE HOMELESS.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN HOW
ARCHITECTS ARE RETHINKING THE
DESIGN OF SOME OF LOS ANGELES'
HOUSING FOR THE CITY'S HOMELESS.
WATCH OUR VIDEO ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: IN AFGHANISTAN
TODAY, THE TALIBAN ATTACKED
POLICE IN THE SOUTHERN PROVINCE
OF HELMAND, KILLING AT LEAST 20
OFFICERS AND WOUNDING TWO
OTHERS.
IT'S THE LATEST IN A SERIES OF
DEADLY TALIBAN ATTACKS THERE.
NOW WE'RE LEARNING THE TALIBAN
MAY BE GETTING AN INFLUX OF
OUTSIDE SUPPORT FOR THESE
ATTACKS.
THE ALLEGED SOURCE?
IRAN.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
ISTANBUL IS THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL'S MARGHERITA STANCATI.
>> WHAT SORT OF SUPPORT IS IRAN
DELIVERING TO THE TALIBAN IN
AFGHANISTAN?
>> MANY DIFFERENT TYPES OF
SUPPORT.
IT STARTED GRADUAL, MOSTLY JUST
THROUGH FINANCING BUT OVER THE
YEARS IT HAS EXPANDED TO INCLUDE
EQUIPMENT SUCH AS WEAPONS AND
AMMUNITION.
AND NOW MORE RECENTLY ALSO
TRAINING AND RECRUITMENT OF THE
TALIBAN FIGHTERS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT IS
IRAN'S INTEREST IN SUPPORTING
THE TALIBAN IN AFGHANISTAN?
>> WELL, IRAN WANTS TO BE
RELEVANT IN AFGHANISTAN IN
GENERAL AND AFGHANISTAN'S FUTURE
LOOKING MORE UNCERTAIN NOW THAN
IT HAS FOR A LONG TIME, IT
WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO HAVE THE
INFLUENCE OF ALL KEY ACTORS AND
THAT NOW INCLUDES THE TALIBAN.
>> AND THEY'RE INVOLVED IN
SEVERAL OTHER PARTS IN THIS
FIGHT AGAINST SEAR GRA.
I MEAN THEY'RE SUPPORTING ALL
KINDS OF ACTORS IN DIFFERENT
PLACES.
YEAH.
THEY PURSUE A VERY ACTIVIST
FOREIGN POLICY IN THE REGION.
YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT THE FIRES
TIME THEY HAVE RECRUITED AFGHAN
FIGHTERS.
THEY HAVE ALSO RECRUITED AFGHANS
FIGHTING SYRIA WITH THE REGION
BUT THIS IS A DIFFERENT FOCUS
BECAUSE HERE THEY'RE SIDING WITH
THE TALIBAN AND THAT'S NOT AN
OBVIOUS ALLIANCE.
IRAN IS A THEOCRACY AND IN THE
PAST THEY NEARLY WENT TO WAR
WITH IRAN BUT OVER THE PAST 13
YEARS THEY BEGAN REACHING OUT TO
THE TALIBAN AS WELL BECAUSE THEY
HAVE AN ENEMY IN COMMON AND THAT
WAS THE UNITED STATES.
THEN MORE RECENTLY WHAT BROUGHT
IRAN CLOSE TO THE TALIBAN HAS
BEEN THE EMERGENCE OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE WITHIN THE AFGHAN
TERRITORY AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: NONE OF THIS
HAPPENS IN A VACUUM.
DOES THIS INFORMATION HAVE AN
IMPACT ON THE ONGOING NUCLEAR
NEGOTIATIONS?
>> IT'S TOO EARLY TO SAY.
BUT IT COULD DEFINITELY ADD
FUTURE TO CREDIT INCOMPETENCE
WHO SAY A POSSIBLE DEAL WOULD
GIVE MORE FREEDOM TO IRAN TO
PURSUE ITS POLICY AND THAT'S
DEFINITELY HOW -- SOME OF THE
RESPONSES THAT WE HAVE BEEN
GETTING FROM THE U.S.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF THE
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS WERE LIFTED
AND ALLOWS IRAN TO PURSUE THIS
POLICY OF THEIR MORE FREELY.
>> THAT'S THE FEAR AND THAT'S
WHAT CRITICS HAVE PUT UP AND
MANY OF THE CRITICS HAVE LOOKED
AT THIS EXAMPLE OF IRAN
SUPPORTING THE TALIBAN IN
AFGHANISTAN AS AN EXAMPLE OF
THAT.
>> MARGHERITA STANCATI OF "THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL" JOINING US
LIVE FROM ISTANBUL, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU, YOUR CHANCE TO
COMMENT ON SOME OF OUR RECENT
WORK.
MANY OF YOU WROTE US ABOUT LAST
WEEKEND'S UPDATED SIGNATURE
STORY FROM OHIO ON THE
CONTROVERSIAL USE OF TRAFFIC
CAMERAS TO TICKET MOTORISTS FOR
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
SOME OF THE VIEWERS WE HEARD
FROM DEFENDED THE PRACTICE.
PATRICK DEVINE SAID:
"LOVE THEM.
REDUCES THE NUMBER OF POLICE
OFFICERS NEEDED FOR TRAFFIC
CONTROL SO THEY CAN ENFORCE
OTHER AREA.
RED LIGHT CAMERAS HAVE BEEN
PROVEN TO SAVE LIVES."
THOMAS LANGR ADDED:
"I'LL BE IN THE MINORITY HERE,
BUT AFTER SEEING ALL THE
ACCIDENTS CAUSED BY MOTORISTS
BREAKING THE RULES, AND SO MANY
CLOSE CALLS MYSELF, I SEE A
PLACE FOR THEM."
MARTIN WROTE:
"WE'VE HAD THEM IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA FOR YEARS.
THESE CAMERAS WILL ALWAYS BE
REGARDED AS REVENUE-RAISERS
UNTIL THE MONEY FROM FINES IS
USED FOR ROAD SAFETY NOT GENERAL
REVENUE."
THERE WAS ALSO THIS FROM NATHAN
ENGLE:
"I DEFINITELY SEE THE ARGUMENT
THAT IT'S TOXIC TO TURN
MUNICIPAL FINES INTO A FOR-
PROFIT VENTURE, BUT I'M NOT AT
ALL COMFORTABLE STANDING ON THE
SIDE OF PEOPLE TRYING TO ARGUE
THAT IT WAS NO BIG DEAL THAT
THEY BLEW THROUGH A RED LIGHT."
BUT OTHERS FELT THERE WAS NO
NEED FOR TRAFFIC CAMERAS, AND
THAT THEY DO NOTHING STOP
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
MIKE MILLAN SAID:
"THESE ARE JUST REVENUE
GENERATING MACHINES THAT DO
NOTHING TO DECREASE TRAFFIC
PROBLEMS.
THEY SHOULD BE TAKEN DOWN AND
OUTLAWED."
MIKEMANN MCMAHON WROTE:
"OUR EXPERIENCE WITH THEM IN
MINNEAPOLIS WAS DUBIOUS, AND WAS
DETERMINED UNCONSTITUTIONAL BY
THE STATE SUPREME COURT."
SEAN BURNS HAD THIS TO SAY:
"JUST ANOTHER WAY TO TURN 'LAW
ENFORCEMENT' INTO A CASH MACHINE
FOR THE CITY."
AND FINALLY THERE WAS THIS FROM
HKRIEGER:
"I ONCE WORKED AS A
PHOTOGRAPHER, BUT THIS SEEMS
LIKE A MORE PROFITABLE WAY TO
MAKE MONEY WITH A CAMERA."
AS ALWAYS WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
VISIT US AT pbs.org/newshour, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE NEWS BEFORE
WE LEAVE YOU, THE PENTAGON IS
POISED TO MOVE HEAVY MILITARY
EQUIPMENT INTO SEVERAL BALTIC
AND EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
NEAR RUSSIA, THIS ACCORDING TO
THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
THE MOVE WOULD BE THE MOST
SIGNIFICANT MILITARY RESPONSE
SINCE RUSSIA ANNEXED CRIMEA LAST
YEAR.
MORE ON THAT TOMORROW.
AND 27 PERSONAL LETTERS WRITTEN
BY ALBERT EINSTEIN SOLD FOR
$427,000 THIS WEEK IN LOS
ANGELES.
IN THE LETTERS EINSTEIN SHARED
HIS THOUGHTS ABOUT GOD,
McCARTHYISM AND NAZIISM.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU HERE TOMORROW.